# The jump-risk premia implicit in options: evidence from an integrated time-series study

The jump-risk premia implicit in options:
evidence from an integrated time-series study
Jun Pann
Sloan School of Management, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA
Received 14 August 2000; received in revised form 4 April 2001
Abstract
This paper examines the joint time series of the S&P 500 index and near-the-money shortdated
option prices with an arbitrage-free model, capturing both stochastic volatility and
jumps. Jump-risk premia uncovered from the joint data respond quickly to market volatility,
becoming more prominent during volatile markets. This form of jump-risk premia is
important not only in reconciling the dynamics implied by the joint data, but also in
explaining the volatility ‘‘smirks’’ of cross-sectional options data. r 2002 Elsevier Science
S.A. All rights reserved.
JEL classification: G12
Keywords: Option pricing; Stochastic volatility; Jump-risk premium; Implied-state generalized method of
moments; Volatility ‘‘smiles’’ and ‘‘smirks’’
$I benefited from discussions with professors and doctoral students in the finance program at Stanford
University. I am especially grateful to my advisers, Darrell Duffie and Ken Singleton, who inspired me to
take on this project, and helped with their insightful comments and warm encouragement. I also benefited
from extensive discussions with Jun Liu, as well as comments from two anonymous referees, Andrew Ang,
David Bates, Joe Chen, Mark Ferguson, Peter Glynn, Harrison Hong, Ming Huang, Mike Johannes,
George Papanicolaou, Monika Piazzesi, Tom Sargent, and seminar participants at Stanford, Berkeley,
MIT, UCLA, HBS, Rochester, Wisconsin Madison, Michigan, Duke, Kellogg, Chicago, Columbia, the
Stanford Financial Engineering Workshop, Cornell, Minnesota, the Conference on Risk Neutral and
Objective Probability Distributions, Boston College, and the 2001 AFA meetings. This paper was
previously circulated as ‘‘Integrated Time-Series Analysis of Spot and Option Prices.’’
n Tel.: +1-617-253-3083; fax: +1-617-258-6855

<!-- Page:0 -->

## 1. Introduction 

It has been widely documented that stock returns exhibit both stochastic volatility and jumps. The importance of such risk factors arises not only from time-series studies of stock prices, but also from cross-sectional studies of stock options (Bakshi et al., 1997; Bates, 2000). This brings us to ask an important question that was left unanswered by past studies: To what extent are such risk factors, namely volatility and jump risks, priced in the financial market? In particular, what is the market price of the jump risk? Is the jump risk priced differently from the diffusive risk? Answers to these questions have a direct impact on investors' decision-making, and could also shed some light on how investors react to various types of uncertainty.

In this paper, we address these issues by focusing on the risk premia implicit in the S&P 500 index options. Although there is a rich body of empirical studies on options, our understanding of the risk premia in options is still limited. In particular, the role of jump-risk premia in option pricing has not been examined to date.$^{2}$ In light of this, we adopt the Bates (2000) model, which extends the stochastic volatility model of Heston (1993) by incorporating state-dependent price jumps. Under such a setting, the S&P 500 index returns are affected by three distinctively different risk factors: (1) the diffusive price shocks, (2) the price jumps, and (3) the diffusive volatility shocks. The dynamic properties of such risk factors and, more important for our purpose, the market prices of such risk factors determine how options on the S&P 500 index are priced. To facilitate our analysis of how various risk factors are priced, we introduce a parametric pricing kernel to price all three risk factors, including the volatility risk and the jump risk. An important feature of the jump-risk premium considered here is that it is allowed to depend on the market volatility.

To estimate the price dynamics simultaneously with the parametric pricing kernel, we adopt an integrated approach to the time-series data on the S&P 500 index and options. Such an integrated approach has long been advocated in the literature, but its implementation has only been recent. For example, in a non-parametric setting, Ait-Sahalia et al. (2001) compare the risk-neutral densities estimated separately from spot prices and option prices. In a parametric setting, Chernov and Ghysels (2000) use joint time-series data to estimate the Heston (1993) model.

Our integrated approach differs from those adopted by earlier studies in that we device an ‘‘implied-state’’ generalized method of moments (IS-GMM) estimation strategy to take full advantage of the analytical tractability of the Bates (2000) model. For a given set $W$ of model parameters, we proxy for the unobserved volatility, $V_{t}$, with an option-implied volatility, $V_{t}^{\vartheta}$, inverted from the time-$t$ spot price, $S_{t}$, and a near-the-money short-dated option price, $C_{t}$, using the

---

See, for example, Jorion (1989), Andersen et al. (1998), Eraker et al. (2000), Chernov et al. (1999, 2000), and the references therein.

In pure-diffusion setings, the role of volatility-risk premia has been examined by Guo (1998), Benzoni (1998), Chernov and Ghysels (2000), Poteshman (1998), and Bakshi and Kapadia (2001). These studies, however, do not address the issue of jump-risk premia nor do they provide insight on the relative importance of the premia for jump and volatility risks.

<!-- Page:1 -->

model-implied option-pricing formula. Access to the option-implied stochastic volatility, $V^{9}$ ; allows us to explore the joint distribution of spot and option prices by focusing directly on the dynamic structure of the state variables: the stock price $S$ and the stochastic volatility $V$ : This approach is particularly attractive in our setting, as the conditional moment-generating function of $(S,V)$ is explicitly known, while the conditional distribution of $(S,C)$ could be complicated because of the nonlinearity of option pricing.

Under such an integrated approach, the role of risk premia arises naturally as we attempt to reconcile the dynamics implied by the joint time series $\{S_{t},~C_{t}\}$ of the S&P 500 index and the near-the-money short-dated option prices. For example, for a model in which neither jump risk nor volatility risk is priced, strong inconsistency arises between the level of volatility observed in the spot market and that implied, through the model, by the options market. In particular, the option-implied volatility is too high to be rationalized by the ex-post realized volatility observed in the spot market. Similar findings are reported by Jackwerth and Rubinstein (1996) in the setting of the Black and Scholes (1973) model. One natural explanation for this bias is that option prices contain a risk-premium component associated with additional risk factors such as stochastic volatility and jumps. Allowing for a volatility-risk premium, and fitting the stochastic-volatility model of Heston (1993) to the joint time-series data $\left\{S_{t},\thinspace C_{t}\right\}$ ; we find a significant volatility-risk premium, as well as an improvement in goodness-of-fit. Overall, however, the model is still rejected by the joint data. Moreover, the volatility-risk premium thus estimated from the joint time-series data implies an explosive volatility process under the ‘‘riskneutral’’ measure, leading to severely overpriced long-dated options.

Given the poor performance of the model with volatility-risk premia, an alternative approach is to introduce jump and jump-risk premium to the Heston (1993) model. Indeed, fitting the Bates (2000) model (with a state-dependent jumprisk premium) to the joint time-series data $\{S_{t},~C_{t}\}$ ; we find a significant premium for jump risk. In contrast to the case with volatility-risk premium, the model is not rejected by the joint time-series data, and the estimated level of jump-risk premium does not result in any distortion of the long-dated option prices. Finally, when allowing both types of risk premia to reconcile simultaneously the spot and option dynamics, we find that the state-dependent jump-risk premium dominates by far the volatility-risk premium.

In addition to the joint time-series data $\left\{S_{t},\thinspace C_{t}\right\}$ that have so far been the focus of our model estimation and empirical analyses, we also observe on each date $t$ a crosssection of options with varying degrees of moneyness and maturities. This rich set of options data provides a challenging test of our empirical results. Using the model parameters estimated exclusively from the joint time series $\left\{S_{t},\mathbf{\Xi}C_{t}\right\}$ of one spot and one option, we find that the Bates (2000) model explains the cross-sectional options data surprisingly well, capturing, in particular, the changes over time of the ‘‘smirk’’ patterns that are exhibited in options with different moneyness. Again, the key component here is the state-dependent jump-risk premium, under which small negative jumps in the actual dynamics are perceived to be significantly more negative in the ‘‘risk-neutral’’ measure. The importance of such negative ‘‘risk-neutral’’ jumps

<!-- Page:2 -->

in capturing the ‘‘smirk’’ patterns has also been documented by Bakshi et al. (1997) and Bates (2000). We reach to the same conclusion, however, in different ways. While their model estimates (the ‘‘risk-neutral’’ part) are obtained by fitting directly to the entire cross-sectional options, ours are estimated using the time series $\left\{S_{t},C_{t}\right\}$ of only one spot and one option. While their empirical implication stays at the level of the ‘‘risk-neutral’’ dynamics, ours goes one step further by noting that volatility ‘‘smirks’’ are primarily due to investors’ fear of large adverse price jumps. Moreover, given that the jump-risk premium is, in fact, estimated using near-the-money option prices, our results show that such fear of jump risk is reflected not only in deep outof-the-money (OTM) puts, but in near-the-money options as well.

To understand the pricing kernel that links the two markets, the spot and options data can be exploited in alternative ways. Under a consumption-based asset pricing setting, Jackwerth (2000) and Ait-Sahalia and Lo (2000) uncover the risk-aversion coefficient for a representative agent by comparing the risk-neutral distribution implied by index options with the actual distribution estimated from the time series of index. In the same spirit, Rosenberg and Engle (1999) estimate an empirical pricing kernel. In this paper, we rely instead on an arbitrage-free asset pricing model with a parametric pricing kernel that prices diffusive return shocks, volatility shocks, and jump risks. Different risk factors would have different impacts on option prices, and the compensation for their uncertainty could also be reflected in very different ways through option pricing. By allowing investors to have different risk attitudes toward the three types of risk factors, our parametric approach to the pricing kernel allows us to investigate such differences. Indeed, our empirical results indicate that investors might have distinctly different risk attitudes toward jump risk and diffusive risk.

Finally, it should be noted that our empirical results build on the premise that the options market is fully integrated with the spot market, sharing the same price dynamics and the same market prices of risks. If the options market is somehow segmented from the spot market because of some option-specific factors such as liquidity, it then becomes impossible to identify the parametric pricing kernel in our current setting. In a related issue, Jackwerth and Rubinstein (1996) raise the possibility of a ‘‘peso’’ component (extreme and rare events) in option prices, which is found to be important by Ait-Sahalia et al. (2001). Given that jumps are inherently infrequent, and our sample period is relatively short, it is empirically hard to separate the ‘‘peso’’ hypothesis from that of jump-risk premia. In principle, however, these two hypotheses are fundamentally different. The ‘‘peso’’ explanation implies that OTM put options are priced with premia because of the potential occurrence of extreme events, which have not yet been materialized. By contrast, the risk-premia explanation emphasizes investors’ aversion to such extreme events – options (especially OTM put options) are priced with premia not only because of the likelihood and magnitude of such rare events, but also because of investors’ aversion to such events.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 specifies the Bates (2000) model, the parametric pricing kernel, and the option-pricing formula. Section 3 outlines the integrated approach adopted in this paper and provides details

<!-- Page:3 -->

on the estimation strategy. Section 4 describes the data. Section 5 summarizes the empirical findings. Section 6 concludes the paper. Technical details are provided in appendices.

## 2. The model

We adopt the Bates (2000) model to characterize the stock return dynamics. As summarized in Section 2.1, this model introduces three sources of uncertainty to the underlying price dynamics: (1) diffusive return shocks, (2) volatility shocks, and (3) jump risks.[^1] The market prices of these risk factors are characterized in Section 2.2. A brief description of option pricing under this dynamic setting is presented in Section 2.3. Details about the state-price density that gives rise to the market prices of risks are given in Appendix A, and additional information about option pricing is provided in Appendix B.

### 2.1. The data-generating process

We fix a probability space $(\Omega,{\mathcal{F}},P)$ and an information filtration $(\mathcal{F}_{t})$ satisfying the usual conditions (see, for example, Protter, 1990), and let $S$ be the ex-dividend price process of a stock that pays dividends at a stochastic proportional rate $q$ : Adopting the model of Bates (2000), we assume the following data-generating process for the stock price $S$

$$
\begin{aligned} \mathrm{d}S_t &= \left[r_t - q_t + \eta^s V_t + \lambda V_t (\mu - \mu^*)\right] S_t \, \mathrm{d}t + \sqrt{V_t} S_t \, \mathrm{d}W_t^{(1)} \\ &\quad + \mathrm{d}Z_t - \mu S_t \lambda V_t \, \mathrm{d}t, \end{aligned} \tag{2.1}
$$

$$
\mathrm{d}V_t = \kappa_v(\bar{v} - V_t)\,\mathrm{d}t + \sigma_v\sqrt{V_t}\Big(\rho\,\mathrm{d}W_t^{(1)} + \sqrt{1 - \rho^2}\,\mathrm{d}W_t^{(2)}\Big), \tag{2.2}
$$

where $r$ is a stochastic interest-rate process, $W=[W^{(1)},W^{(2)}]^{\top}$ is an adapted standard Brownian motion in $\mathbb{R}^{2}$ ; and $Z$ is a pure-jump process.

This model captures two important features of the stock return dynamics, namely stochastic volatility and price jumps, and still provides analytical tractability for option pricing and model estimation. First, stochastic volatility is modeled by the autonomous process $V$ defined by Eq. (2.2), which is a one-factor ‘‘square-root’’ process with constant long-run mean $\bar{v}$ ; mean-reversion rate $\kappa_{v}$ ; and volatility coefficient $\sigma_{v}$ :[^2] This volatility specification, introduced by Heston (1993), allows the ‘‘Brownian’’ shocks to price $S$ and volatility $V$ to be correlated with constant coefficient $\rho$ ; capturing an important stylized fact that stock returns are typically negatively correlated with changes in volatility (Black, 1976).

---

[^1]: To be more precise, this model involves five sources of uncertainty. As it becomes clear in Section 2.1, the two additional shocks are associated with the riskfree rate and the dividend yields.

[^2]: It should be noted that we call the variance $V$ the volatility, which is typically referred to as the standard deviation of returns. This change of terminology should not cause any confusion.

<!-- Page:4 -->

Second, this model captures price jumps via the pure-jump process $Z$ ; which contains two components: random jump-event times and random jump sizes. The jump-event times $\{\mathcal{T}_{i}:i\geqslant1\}$ arrive with a state-dependent stochastic intensity process $\{\lambda V_{t}:t\geqslant0\}$ for some non-negative constant $\lambda$: Given the arrival of the ith jump event, the stock price jumps from $S(\mathcal{T}_{i}-)$ to $S(\mathcal{T}_{i}-)\exp(U_{i}^{s})$ ; where $U_{i}^{s}$ is normally distributed with mean $\mu_{J}$ and variance $\sigma_{J}^{2}$ ; independent of $W$ ; of inter-jump times, and of $U_{j}^{s}$ for $j\neq i$ : Intuitively, the conditional probability at time $t$ of another jump before $t+\Delta t$ is, for some small $\Delta t$ ; approximately $\lambda V_{t}\Delta t$ and, conditional on a jump event, the mean relative jump size is $\mu=\operatorname{E}(\exp(U^{s})-1)=\exp(\mu_{J}+\sigma_{J}^{2}/2)-1$ : Combining the effects of random jump timing and sizes, the last term $\mu S_{t}\lambda V_{t}\mathrm{d}t$ in Eq. (2.1) compensates for the instantaneous change in expected stock returns introduced by the pure-jump process $Z$ :

Given that the pure-diffusion model of Heston (1993) cannot explain the tailfatness of the stock return distribution (Andersen et al., 1998), nor can it explain the ‘‘smirkiness’’ exhibited in the cross-sectional options data (Bakshi et al., 1997; Bates, 2000), the extension to include jumps is well motivated. It should be emphasized, however, that our main motivation is to study how such jump risks are priced and, in particular, their role in reconciling the spot and option dynamics. As will become evident in the next section, we choose the linear specification $\lambda V$ of jump-arrival intensity to allow for a state-dependent jump-risk premium, i.e., to allow for the possibility that when the market is more volatile, the jump-risk premium implicit in option prices becomes higher.

Focusing on the drift component of the stock price dynamics, we see that the stock price appreciates with interest rate $r_{t}$ ; pays out dividend rate $q_{t}$ ; and appreciates with two risk-premium components: $\eta^{s}V_{t}$ and $\lambda V_{t}(\mu-\mu^{*})$ ; which are associated with the premia for ‘‘Brownian’’ return risks and jump risks, respectively. We postpone a formal discussion on the risk-premium components to Section 2.2.

The short interest-rate process $r$ is of the type modeled by Cox et al. (1985). Specifically, $r$ and the dividend-rate process $q$ are defined by

$$
d r_t = \kappa_r (\bar{r} - r_t) \, dt + \sigma_r \sqrt{r_t} \, dW^{(r)}_t
$$

$$
\mathrm{d}q_t = \kappa_q (\bar{q} - q_t) \, \mathrm{d}t + \sigma_q \sqrt{q_t} \, \mathrm{d}W_t^{(q)}, \tag{2.3}
$$

where $W^{(r)}$ and $W^{(q)}$ are independent adapted standard Brownian motions in $\mathbb{R}$ ; independent also of $W$ and $Z$ : Similar to the stochastic-volatility process $V$ ; both $r$

---

This jumpmodelis of the Cox-procestype. Conditional on the path of $V$ ; jump arrivals are Poisson with time-varying intensity $\{\lambda V_{t}:t\geqslant0\}$ . See, for example, Bremaud (1981).

$^6\mathrm{It}$ should be noted that to maintain a parsimonious model, we leave out the constant component in jump arrival intensity. Using stock return data alone, evidence in support of state-dependent jump arrival intensity is documented by Johannes et al. (1998), while the studies of Chernov et al. (1999) and Andersen et al. (1998) emphasize the importance of the constant component. For the purpose of reconciling spot and option dynamics, we find the state-dependent component to play a dominating role. The constraint of zero constant component will be formally tested in Section 5.1. In addition to the linear specification, the case of nonlinear dependency of the arrival intensity on $V$ seems interesting, so is the case of state-dependent jump sizes. For analytical tractability, however, these specifications are not considered here.

<!-- Page:5 -->

and $q$ are autonomous one-factor square-root processes with constant long-run means $\bar{r}$ and $\bar{q}$, mean-reversion rates $\kappa_{r}$ and $\kappa_{q}$, and volatility coefficients $\bar{\sigma}_{r}$ and $\sigma_{q}$.

We choose to treat $r$ and $q$ as stochastic processes, as opposed to time-varying constants, in order to accommodate stochastic interest rates and dividend yields, which vary in the data, and whose levels indeed affect even short-dated option prices. Our formulation of $r$ and $q$; however, precludes possible correlation between the two, as well as more plausible and richer dynamics for the short-rate process. But for the short-dated options used to fit our model, the particular stochastic nature of interest rates $r$ and dividend yields $q$ plays a relatively minor role.

Finally, one limitation of our volatility specification is that it does not allow volatility to jump, a feature that is found to be important in stock returns (Eraker et al., 2000). In an issue that is related, Jones (1999) points out that, compared with the constant elastic variance (CEV) model, the square-root specification does not allow volatility to increase fast enough. The severity of these limitations will be investigated in Section 5.4 by diagnostic tests on the volatility dynamics. Their implications on our understanding of the jump-risk premia will also be discussed. Overall, to maintain a parsimonious model is the main reason why volatility jumps are not considered here, and the CEV specification is not incorporated for analytical tractability.$^{7}$

